[TT-10294] docs: Tyk 5.13.0 release notes (#1839)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: developer-support/release-notes/dashboard.mdx

| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Gateway | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

There are no deprecations in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions
<a id="upgrade-5.13.0"></a>

If you are upgrading to 5.13.0, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.13.0)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.13.0
    ```
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart)

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.13.0" data-scroll-offset></a>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

> 

Reviewer: Almost all of these are purely UI changes, 
We could group all of them under one Accordion, but I think having them separated is better for visibility, given this is the only added items we have apart from MCP.

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.13.0) below.

#### Breaking Changes

**MCP Proxy policies visible in Developer Portal when running Portal versions earlier than v1.17.1**

Dashboard 5.13.0 introduces MCP Proxy definitions and the policies that grant access to them. If you are running the Developer Portal (EDP) at a version earlier than v1.17.1 alongside Dashboard 5.13.0, MCP Proxy policies are not filtered from the developer catalogue. An administrator could inadvertently publish an MCP server to portal users.

Upgrade to **EDP v1.17.1 or later** before or immediately after upgrading the Dashboard. EDP v1.17.1 filters MCP Proxy policies from the developer catalogue until full portal support for MCP is available.

#### Dependencies
<a id="dependencies-5.13.0"></a>

| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
|--------|-------------------|-------------|
| 5.13.0 | MDCB v2.11.0       | MDCB v2.11.0 |
|        | Operator v1.4.0   | Operator v0.17 |
|        | Sync v2.1.7       | Sync v2.1.1 |
|        | Helm Chart v5.2.0   | Helm all versions |

> |        | EDP v1.17.2        | EDP all versions |

Reviewer 2: is EDP v1.17.2 ok? From reading the text it would seem it was intended 1.17.1

| [Golang](https://go.dev/dl/)          | 1.25 | 1.25 | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.25 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)   | 5.x, 6.x, 7.x    |  5.x, 6.x, 7.x    | | 
| [Valkey](https://valkey.io/download/) | 8.0.x, 8.1.x    | 7.2.x, 8.0.x, 8.1.x    | | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 6, 7, 8  | 5, 6, 7, 8  | | 
| [DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb/)  | 4, 5  | 4, 5  | | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) | 13.x - 17.x | 13.x - 17.x  | | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.2.html) | v3.1.x | v3.1.x | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas)|

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

There are no deprecations in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions
<a id="upgrade-5.13.0"></a>

If you are upgrading to 5.13.0, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

> If your deployment uses MCP Gateway, additional component ordering applies. In hybrid deployments, MDCB 2.11.0 must be deployed before Gateway and Dashboard. Tyk Operator 1.4.0 must be deployed after Gateway and Dashboard are running. Portal 1.17.1 should be deployed before any MCP Proxy policies are created in Dashboard. See [MCP Gateway upgrade considerations](/developer-support/upgrading#mcp-upgrade-considerations) for the full sequence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your deployment uses MCP Gateway, additional component ordering applies:
- In hybrid deployments, MDCB 2.11.0 must be deployed before Gateway and Dashboard. 
- Tyk Operator 1.4.0 must be deployed after Gateway and Dashboard are running. 
- Portal 1.17.1 should be deployed before any MCP Proxy policies are created in Dashboard. 

See [MCP Gateway upgrade considerations](/developer-support/upgrading#mcp-upgrade-considerations) for the full sequence.
```

Keys and policies can now carry four new MCP-specific access-right fields for configuring tool-based access control and per-primitive rate limiting.

This release also delivers a range of Dashboard UI enhancements, bug fixes, and CVE fixes to provide additional protection against security vulnerabilities.

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.13.0) below.

#### Breaking Changes

**MCP Proxy policies visible in Developer Portal when running Portal versions earlier than v1.17.2**

Dashboard 5.13.0 introduces MCP Proxy definitions and the policies that grant access to them. If you are running the Developer Portal (EDP) at a version earlier than v1.17.2 alongside Dashboard 5.13.0, MCP Proxy policies may not be fully filtered from the developer catalogue. An administrator could inadvertently publish an MCP server to portal users.

Upgrade to **EDP v1.17.2** before or immediately after upgrading the Dashboard:

> - **EDP v1.17.1** provides a partial mitigation: it filters MCP Proxy policies that have Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) or per-primitive rate limiting configured. Basic MCP Proxy policies — those that grant API access without TBAC fields — are not filtered.

Reviewer 4: I don't see any value mentioning 1.17.1 here -> just direct users to go to 1.17.2

- **EDP v1.17.2** provides the complete fix: it detects MCP Proxy APIs by type and filters all MCP Proxy policies from the developer catalogue, regardless of whether TBAC is configured.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

**Strict Validation of Characters Allowed in Policy IDs**

To avoid an issue where Policy IDs containing special characters could cause problems when parsing API endpoint requests, we have introduced strict validation of Policy IDs during Policy creation and update.

The allowed characters are:
- alphanumeric characters
- `_`
- `-`
- `.`
- `~`

Strict validation can be disabled, if required for existing Policies with incompatible Policy IDs, using the new Dashboard configuration `allow_unsafe_policy_ids`. If using this mode, care must be taken not to use characters that could affect URL parsing.

```

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

There are no deprecations in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions
<a id="upgrade-5.13.0"></a>

If you are upgrading to 5.13.0, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

If your deployment uses MCP Gateway, additional component ordering applies. In hybrid deployments, MDCB 2.11.0 must be deployed before Gateway and Dashboard. Tyk Operator 1.4.0 must be deployed after Gateway and Dashboard are running. Portal 1.17.2 should be deployed before any MCP Proxy policies are created in Dashboard. See [MCP Gateway upgrade considerations](/developer-support/upgrading#mcp-upgrade-considerations) for the full sequence.

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.13.0)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.13.0
    ```
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

<Note>
Tyk Helm Charts are configured to install the LTS version of Tyk Dashboard. You will need to modify them to install v5.13.0.
</Note>

```

For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add MCP access-right fields to keys and policies'>
Keys and policies now support four new access-right fields for configuring Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) and per-primitive rate limiting on MCP Proxy APIs:

- `json_rpc_methods`: per-method rate limits (e.g., `tools/call`, `resources/read`)
- `json_rpc_methods_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by JSON-RPC method name
- `mcp_primitives`: per-primitive rate limits keyed by type and name
- `mcp_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by primitive type and name (tool, resource, or prompt)

Validation rejects these fields on non-MCP APIs with a `400 Bad Request` response. Unknown API IDs are skipped during validation to avoid false negatives at Gateway startup.

For details, see the [MCP proxy policies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/policies).
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Add validation for unsupported middleware in MCP Proxy definitions'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

This is an internal ticket - does not need to be called out in the change log. The MCP documentation should mention restrictions on unsupported middleware.

Creating or updating an MCP Proxy definition with unsupported middleware now returns a `400 Bad Request` response with a descriptive error message listing the specific violations.

The following middleware types are not supported in MCP Proxy definitions:
- **Global level**: batch processing, global cache
- **Per-primitive level**: method transform, response body transform, URL rewrite, internal, cache, validate request, mock response

Unsupported middleware is also stripped from the definition as a defence-in-depth measure.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='MCP Gateway is now generally available'>

Reviewer 4: What's the `enable_mcp` flag? Was that in a previous release... or is this an internal change note?

If this *is* valid, then put it at the top of the change log (or at least, as the first MCP entry).

I'm not sure about "MCP Gateway" - isn't it "MCP Proxy support by Tyk Gateway"?

The `enable_mcp` configuration flag and its associated page-data injection have been removed. MCP Gateway is production-ready and access to MCP management in the Dashboard is now controlled solely by the `mcp` RBAC permission.

No configuration change is required for users who do not use MCP. Users who previously set `enable_mcp: true` in their Dashboard configuration can safely remove the flag; it has no effect.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Add Configurable Session Object Management for Redis Memory Optimization'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Simplified Management of Session Lifetime'>
```

> We have added new session object management controls to the Dashboard UI and API to help prevent Redis memory bloat. This feature introduces two new configuration options that can be set on keys and policies:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have added a new, simplified, approach to configuring [Session lifetime](/api-management/access-control/sessions-and-keys/session-lifecycle) within Redis.

Two new fields have been added to the Session object, which can be directly configured when creating Sessions using the [Keys API](/api-reference/keys/create-custom-key) or [Policy API](/api-reference/policies/create-policy-definition), or from the key/policy management screens in the Dashboard UI:
```

> - [post_expiry_action](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_action) - defines whether to delete or retain session objects when keys expire

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [post_expiry_action](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_action) - determines what happens to the data in Redis after the `expires` timestamp is reached.
```

> - [post_expiry_grace_period](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_grace_period) - sets the retention period beyond key expiry (supports "forever" when set to -1)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [post_expiry_grace_period](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_grace_period) - defines how long (in seconds) the Session is kept in Redis after expiration (if the `post_expiry_actions` is to retain the Session)
```

> In the Dashboard UI, these options are available on the Configurations tab when creating or editing keys and policies. The interface uses progressive disclosure, showing expiry behavior options only when keys are configured to expire, with additional retention settings displayed when "Retain" is selected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> The feature maintains full backward compatibility with existing session lifetime configurations. If [post_expiry_action](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_action) is set to `retain` and [post_expiry_grace_period](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#post_expiry_grace_period) is set to `0`, Tyk will continue using the legacy approach with [session_lifetime](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#session_lifetime), [global_session_lifetime](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#global_session_lifetime), and related Gateway configuration options.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The existing Gateway-wide [global session lifetime](/api-management/access-control/sessions-and-keys/session-lifecycle#gateway-level-settings) override is still respected.

The [legacy API level controls](/api-management/access-control/sessions-and-keys/session-lifecycle#legacy-controls) can still be used if both new fields are set to `0` (or unset) so **there is no change in behavior for existing Sessions**.
```

- **Improved certificate ID visibility**: Certificate IDs are now displayed in full when space allows, and truncated from the left (preserving the distinctive fingerprint) when space is limited. The behavior is consistent across the Certificate Store, API Designers, Keys, Policies, and all certificate selection components, with the full ID always available on hover.

- **Configurable toast notification duration**: The display duration of toast notifications can now be configured separately for success, warning, info, and error messages via the new [ui.notifications.duration](/tyk-dashboard/configuration#ui-notifications-duration) configuration option, replacing the previous fixed three-second duration. This helps reduce visual noise from frequent notifications while keeping critical messages visible for longer.

- **Skip Universal Data Graph schema update confirmations**: Added a checkbox to suppress the confirmation modal when updating Universal Data Graph schemas. When selected, confirmations are skipped for the remainder of the browser session and reset on a new session, supporting faster iterative development while preserving safe defaults.
</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

> ##### Fixed

Reviewer 4: Please update with any changes agreed in 5.8.14 release notes.

The system now automatically translates these escape sequences during API ingestion, ensuring that OpenAPI documents with JavaScript regex patterns import successfully regardless of whether single or double quotes are used in the YAML definition.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fix Dashboard Certificate Filter for APIs'>
We have resolved an issue where the Dashboard's "Filter by API" feature on the TLS/SSL Certificates page did not return all certificates linked to an API.

Previously, the filter only displayed certificates used for client-to-gateway static mTLS, ignoring certificates used for gateway-to-upstream mTLS, custom domain certificates, and certificate pinning. This resulted in incomplete and misleading results for users trying to view all certificates actively used by a given API.

The Dashboard now correctly returns all certificate types when filtering by API.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix OAS update failures due to duplicated parameter references during import'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fix Tyk OAS update failures during import'>
```

> We have resolved an issue where APIs imported from OpenAPI specifications with external parameter references would fail validation during subsequent update operations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have resolved an issue when importing an updated OpenAPI document to update an existing Tyk OAS APIs if the OpenAPI document contained external parameter references.
```

> Previously, when importing OAS files that referenced multiple distinct parameters from external files (e.g., `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/ID'`, `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/Name'`), the Dashboard's import process incorrectly collapsed all external references into a single generic parameter component and duplicated that reference multiple times, creating invalid OpenAPI specifications with multiple parameters having the same name and location.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Previously, when importing OpenAPI documents that referenced multiple distinct parameters from external files (e.g., `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/ID'`, `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/Name'`), the Dashboard's import process incorrectly collapsed all external references into a single generic parameter component and duplicated that reference multiple times, creating invalid OpenAPI specifications with multiple parameters having the same name and location.
```

> The Dashboard now properly resolves external parameter references to distinct parameter definitions during import, ensuring that each `$ref` becomes a separate, uniquely-named parameter component and maintains OpenAPI 3.0 compliance for successful updates.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Dashboard now properly resolves external parameter references to distinct parameter definitions during import, ensuring that each `$ref` becomes a separate, uniquely-named parameter component and maintains OAS compliance for successful updates.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add Strict Validation for Policy ID Characters'>
We have resolved an issue where policy IDs containing special characters could cause problems when parsing API endpoint requests. Previously, policy IDs with characters such as `#`, `?`, `%`, and `/` would interfere with URL parsing in Dashboard and Gateway API endpoints that use the policy ID as a path parameter, potentially causing request failures or unexpected behavior.

We have introduced strict validation across both the Dashboard and Gateway APIs to restrict policy identifiers to a safe character set (alphanumeric characters plus `_`, `-`, `.`, `~`). The validation occurs during policy creation and updates via the following endpoints:
- `POST /api/portal/policies` and `PUT /api/portal/policies/{id}` (Dashboard API)
- `POST /tyk/policies` and `PUT /tyk/policies/{polID}` (Gateway API)

The API now returns a clear error message if an unacceptable character is used in the policy ID field, ensuring reliable policy management across all deployment types.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix JWT Subject and Policy Claim Field Migration'>

Reviewer 4: This is about API definitions created on ANY version prior to the introduction of the multiple IdP solution not being correctly migrated to use the new fields introduced in that solution.

So you should identify the specific version that introduced that change and make it clear that it's API defs created on any earlier version.

Be very clear if it is only Tyk OAS, or all API definitions using JWT Auth.

Way too much detail -> just explain that now when an older API def is imported to Tyk that the values from X will be copied to the new field Y. Perhaps a table?

Note that this does not break backward compatibility, as the original fields are left untouched, so the API defs will still work with the older Gateways.

Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.13 Release Notes 

### 5.13.0 Release Notes 

#### Release Date 08 May 2026

#### Release Highlights

**MCP Gateway Management**
Tyk Dashboard 5.13.0 adds comprehensive management API and access control support for the MCP (Model Context Protocol) Gateway. A dedicated `/api/mcps` endpoint set provides full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy definitions.

A new `mcp` RBAC permission group (deny/read/write) controls access to MCP management independently of the existing `apis` permission. MCP Gateway is now generally available with no feature flag required. Visibility is controlled solely by the `mcp` RBAC permission.

Keys and policies can now carry four new MCP-specific access-right fields for configuring tool-based access control and per-primitive rate limiting.

This release also delivers a range of Dashboard UI enhancements, bug fixes, and CVE fixes to provide additional protection against security vulnerabilities.

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.13.0) below.

#### Breaking Changes

> **MCP Proxy policies visible in Developer Portal when running Portal versions earlier than v1.17.2**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**MCP Proxy policies incorrectly synchronize to Developer Portal versions prior to 1.17.2**
```

> Dashboard 5.13.0 introduces MCP Proxy definitions and the policies that grant access to them. If you are running the Developer Portal (EDP) at a version earlier than v1.17.2 alongside Dashboard 5.13.0, MCP Proxy policies may not be fully filtered from the developer catalogue. An administrator could inadvertently publish an MCP server to portal users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Dashboard 5.13.0 introduces policies that grant access to MCP Proxies. Tyk Developer Portal versions prior to 1.17.2 may automatically retrieve these policies and present them as API Products when [synchronizing with the Dashboard](/portal/api-products#dashboard-first-approach).

There is no facility at this time for Developer Portal to manage API Products that grant access to MCP Proxies. An administrator could inadvertently publish an MCP server to API Consumers leading to a confusing experience.
```

> Upgrade to **EDP v1.17.2** before or immediately after upgrading the Dashboard. EDP v1.17.2 detects MCP Proxy APIs by type and filters all MCP Proxy policies from the developer catalogue.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Upgrade to **Developer Portal 1.17.2 or later** before or immediately after upgrading the Dashboard. Developer Portal 1.17.2 recognises MCP Proxy policies and does not make them available as API Products.
```

#### Dependencies
<a id="dependencies-5.13.0"></a>

| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
|--------|-------------------|-------------|
| 5.13.0 | MDCB v2.11.0       | MDCB v2.11.0 |
|        | Operator v1.4.0   | Operator v0.17 |
|        | Sync v2.1.7       | Sync v2.1.1 |
|        | Helm Chart v5.2.0   | Helm all versions |
|        | EDP v1.17.2        | EDP all versions |
|        | Pump v1.15.0       | Pump all versions |
|        | TIB (if using standalone) v1.7.1 | TIB all versions |

<Note>
To use MCP Gateway features introduced in this release, upgrade the following Tyk components at the same time:

- **Gateway v5.13.0**: MCP Proxy request handling, SSE streaming, TBAC, and per-primitive rate limiting
- **Pump v1.15.0**: MCP analytics (MongoDB, PostgreSQL, Elasticsearch, and Prometheus backends)
- **MDCB v2.11.0**: MCP analytics routing in distributed deployments
- **Operator v1.4.0**: MCP Proxy management via Kubernetes CRDs
- **Sync v2.1.7**: MCP Proxy support in dump and sync operations

> - **EDP v1.17.2**: filters all MCP Proxy policies from the developer catalogue; v1.17.1 provides a partial mitigation covering policies with TBAC or per-primitive rate limiting configured

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Developer Portal v1.17.2**: filters all MCP Proxy policies from the developer catalogue; v1.17.1 provides a partial mitigation covering policies with TBAC or per-primitive rate limiting configured
```

</Note>

##### 3rd Party Dependencies & Tools
<a id="3rdPartyTools-v5.13.0"></a>

| Third Party Dependency | Tested Versions | Compatible Versions | Comments | 
| ---------------------- | --------------- | ------------------- | -------- | 
| [Golang](https://go.dev/dl/)          | 1.25 | 1.25 | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.25 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)   | 5.x, 6.x, 7.x    |  5.x, 6.x, 7.x    | | 
| [Valkey](https://valkey.io/download/) | 8.0.x, 8.1.x    | 7.2.x, 8.0.x, 8.1.x    | | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 6, 7, 8  | 5, 6, 7, 8  | | 
| [DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb/)  | 4, 5  | 4, 5  | | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) | 13.x - 17.x | 13.x - 17.x  | | 

> | [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.2.html) | v3.1.x | v3.1.x | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas)|

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.2.html) | v3.1.x, v3.0.x | v3.1.x, v3.0.x | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas)|
```

For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add MCP access-right fields to keys and policies'>
Keys and policies now support four new access-right fields for configuring Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) and per-primitive rate limiting on MCP Proxy APIs:

- `json_rpc_methods`: per-method rate limits (e.g., `tools/call`, `resources/read`)
- `json_rpc_methods_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by JSON-RPC method name
- `mcp_primitives`: per-primitive rate limits keyed by type and name
- `mcp_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by primitive type and name (tool, resource, or prompt)

Validation rejects these fields on non-MCP APIs with a `400 Bad Request` response. Unknown API IDs are skipped during validation to avoid false negatives at Gateway startup.

For details, see the [MCP proxy policies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/policies).
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Simplified Management of Session Lifetime'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Simplified management of Session lifetime'>
```

We seem to have moved to sentence case, rather than capitalising all words in these titles.

- **Configurable toast notification duration**: The display duration of toast notifications can now be configured separately for success, warning, info, and error messages via the new [ui.notifications.duration](/tyk-dashboard/configuration#ui-notifications-duration) configuration option, replacing the previous fixed three-second duration. This helps reduce visual noise from frequent notifications while keeping critical messages visible for longer.

- **Skip Universal Data Graph schema update confirmations**: Added a checkbox to suppress the confirmation modal when updating Universal Data Graph schemas. When selected, confirmations are skipped for the remainder of the browser session and reset on a new session, supporting faster iterative development while preserving safe defaults.
</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

##### Fixed

<AccordionGroup>

> <Accordion title='Fix JavaScript Regex Unicode Escape Sequence Handling During OpenAPI Import'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fix JavaScript regex unicode escape sequence handling during OpenAPI import'>
```

We have resolved an issue where JavaScript-style Unicode regex patterns in OpenAPI documents failed validation during API import.

Previously, when regex patterns containing Unicode escape sequences (for example `\u0000-\u017f`) were defined with single quotes in YAML, the YAML-to-JSON conversion process would double-escape the backslashes, transforming valid `\u` sequences into invalid `\\u` sequences that were rejected by Tyk's regex validator.

The system now automatically translates these escape sequences during API ingestion, ensuring that OpenAPI documents with JavaScript regex patterns import successfully regardless of whether single or double quotes are used in the YAML definition.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix Dashboard Certificate Filter for APIs'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fix Dashboard certificate filter for APIs'>
```

The Dashboard now correctly returns all certificates when filtering by API.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fix Tyk OAS update failures during import'>
We have resolved an issue when importing an updated OpenAPI document to update an existing Tyk OAS APIs if the OpenAPI document contained external parameter references.

Previously, when importing OpenAPI documents that referenced multiple distinct parameters from external files (e.g., `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/ID'`, `$ref: './parameters.yaml#/Name'`), the Dashboard's import process incorrectly collapsed all external references into a single generic parameter component and duplicated that reference multiple times, creating invalid OpenAPI specifications with multiple parameters having the same name and location.

The Dashboard now properly resolves external parameter references to distinct parameter definitions during import, ensuring that each `$ref` becomes a separate, uniquely-named parameter component and maintains OAS compliance for successful updates.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Add Strict Validation for Policy ID Characters'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Add strict validation for Policy ID characters'>
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='JWT Subject and Policy Claim fields now migrated correctly on load'>
This release fixes a migration issue affecting Tyk OAS APIs with JWT authentication that were created on versions prior to v5.10.0 - the release in which the multiple IdP enhancement introduced the new `subjectClaims`, `basePolicyClaims`, and `jwksURIs` fields, replacing the legacy `identityBaseField` and `policyFieldName` in the Dashboard UI.
When a Tyk OAS JWT API definition created on an earlier version is now loaded in the Dashboard, the legacy field values are automatically copied into the new fields:
| Legacy Field          | New Field            |
|-----------------------|----------------------|
| `identityBaseField`   | `subjectClaims`      |
| `policyFieldName`     | `basePolicyClaims`   |

The `jwksURIs` field is also now populated correctly on initial load rather than only after saving.
Backward compatibility is preserved: the legacy fields are left untouched in the API definition, so the API will continue to work correctly with older Gateways during a phased upgrade.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix API Expiry Date Drift'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fix API expiry date drift'>
```

Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.13 Release Notes 

### 5.13.0 Release Notes 

#### Release Date 19 May 2026

#### Release Highlights

**MCP Gateway Management**

> Tyk Dashboard 5.13.0 adds comprehensive management API and access control support for the MCP (Model Context Protocol) Gateway. A dedicated `/api/mcps` endpoint set provides full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy definitions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tyk Dashboard 5.13.0 adds comprehensive support for the MCP (Model Context Protocol) Gateway. A dedicated `/api/mcps` endpoint set provides full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy definitions.
```

> A new `mcp` RBAC permission group (deny/read/write) controls access to MCP management independently of the existing `apis` permission. Visibility is controlled solely by the `mcp` RBAC permission.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A new `mcp` RBAC permission group (deny/read/write) controls access to MCP management independently of the existing `apis` permission. Visibility is controlled solely by the `mcp` RBAC permission.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> Keys and policies can now carry four new MCP-specific access-right fields for configuring tool-based access control and per-primitive rate limiting.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Sessions (Keys) and Policies can now carry four new MCP-specific access-right fields for configuring tool-based access control and per-primitive rate limiting.
```

#### Upgrade instructions
<a id="upgrade-5.13.0"></a>

If you are upgrading to 5.13.0, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

If your deployment uses MCP Gateway, additional component ordering applies:
- In distributed deployments, MDCB 2.11.0 must be deployed before Gateway and Dashboard.
- Tyk Operator 1.4.0 must be deployed after Gateway and Dashboard are running.
- Portal 1.17.2 should be deployed before any MCP Proxy policies are created in Dashboard.

See [MCP Gateway upgrade considerations](/developer-support/upgrading#mcp-upgrade-considerations) for the full sequence.

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.13.0)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.13.0
    ```
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart)

<Note>
Tyk Helm Charts are configured to install the LTS version of Tyk Dashboard. You will need to modify them to install v5.13.0.
</Note>

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.13.0" data-scroll-offset></a>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Add MCP Proxy management API'>

> We have introduced the `/api/mcps` endpoint set, providing full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy API definitions:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have introduced the `/api/mcps` endpoint set, providing full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy definitions:
```

- `GET /api/mcps`: list MCP Proxies
- `POST /api/mcps`: create an MCP Proxy
- `GET /api/mcps/{id}`: retrieve an MCP Proxy
- `PUT /api/mcps/{id}`: update an MCP Proxy
- `DELETE /api/mcps/{id}`: delete an MCP Proxy

> A schema endpoint at `/api/schemas/apidefs/mcp` returns the MCP API definition JSON schema. MCP Proxy definitions are excluded from general API list responses by default; standard API listing endpoints no longer return MCP Proxy definitions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A schema endpoint at `/api/schemas/apidefs/mcp` returns the MCP Proxy definition JSON schema. MCP Proxy definitions are not returned by the standard API listing endpoints.
```

> For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For details, see the [Managing MCP Proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add dedicated MCP RBAC permission group'>
We have introduced a dedicated `mcp` permission group (deny/read/write) for controlling access to MCP management endpoints in the Dashboard. Previously, `/api/mcps` endpoints fell under the `apis` permission.

Users who need to manage MCP Proxies must be granted `mcp: write`. Read-only access to MCP listings requires `mcp: read`. This change allows organizations to grant access to MCP management without also granting broader API management permissions.

For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Add MCP access-right fields to keys and policies'>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Add MCP access rights to Sessions and Policies'>
```

> Keys and policies now support four new access-right fields for configuring Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) and per-primitive rate limiting on MCP Proxy APIs:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Sessions and Policies now support four new fields for configuring Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) and per-primitive rate limiting on MCP Proxies:
```

- `json_rpc_methods`: per-method rate limits (e.g., `tools/call`, `resources/read`)
- `json_rpc_methods_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by JSON-RPC method name
- `mcp_primitives`: per-primitive rate limits keyed by type and name
- `mcp_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by primitive type and name (tool, resource, or prompt)

> Validation rejects these fields on non-MCP APIs with a `400 Bad Request` response. Unknown API IDs are skipped during validation to avoid false negatives at Gateway startup.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Validation rejects these fields on non-MCP APIs with an `HTTP 400 Bad Request` response. Unknown API IDs are skipped during validation to avoid false negatives at Gateway startup.
```

> For details, see the [MCP proxy policies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/policies).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For details, see the [MCP Proxy policies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/policies).
```

See [MCP Gateway upgrade considerations](/developer-support/upgrading#mcp-upgrade-considerations) for the full sequence.

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.13.0)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.13.0
    ```
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart)

<Note>
Tyk Helm Charts are configured to install the LTS version of Tyk Dashboard. You will need to modify them to install v5.13.0.
</Note>

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.13.0" data-scroll-offset></a>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Add MCP Proxy management API'>
We have introduced the `/api/mcps` endpoint set, providing full CRUD operations for MCP Proxy definitions:

- `GET /api/mcps`: list MCP Proxies
- `POST /api/mcps`: create an MCP Proxy
- `GET /api/mcps/{id}`: retrieve an MCP Proxy
- `PUT /api/mcps/{id}`: update an MCP Proxy
- `DELETE /api/mcps/{id}`: delete an MCP Proxy

A schema endpoint at `/api/schemas/apidefs/mcp` returns the MCP Proxy definition JSON schema. MCP Proxy definitions are not returned by the standard API listing endpoints.

> For details, see the [Managing MCP Proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For details, see the [Managing MCP Proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-proxies).
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add dedicated MCP RBAC permission group'>
We have introduced a dedicated `mcp` permission group (deny/read/write) for controlling access to MCP management endpoints in the Dashboard. Previously, `/api/mcps` endpoints fell under the `apis` permission.

Users who need to manage MCP Proxies must be granted `mcp: write`. Read-only access to MCP listings requires `mcp: read`. This change allows organizations to grant access to MCP management without also granting broader API management permissions.

> For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-mcp-proxies).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For details, see the [Managing MCP proxies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/managing-proxies).
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Add MCP access rights to Sessions and Policies'>
Sessions and Policies now support four new fields for configuring Tool-Based Access Control (TBAC) and per-primitive rate limiting on MCP Proxies:

- `json_rpc_methods`: per-method rate limits (e.g., `tools/call`, `resources/read`)
- `json_rpc_methods_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by JSON-RPC method name
- `mcp_primitives`: per-primitive rate limits keyed by type and name
- `mcp_access_rights`: allow or deny rules by primitive type and name (tool, resource, or prompt)

Validation rejects these fields on non-MCP APIs with an `HTTP 400 Bad Request` response. Unknown API IDs are skipped during validation to avoid false negatives at Gateway startup.

For details, see the [MCP Proxy policies documentation](/ai-management/mcp-gateway/policies).
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Simplified management of Session lifetime'>
We have added a new, simplified, approach to configuring [Session lifetime](/api-management/access-control/sessions-and-keys/session-lifecycle) within Redis.

> Two new fields have been added to the Session object, which can be directly configured when creating Sessions using the [Keys API](/api-reference/keys/create-custom-key) or [Policy API](/api-reference/policies/create-policy-definition), or from the key/policy management screens in the Dashboard UI:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Two new fields have been added to the Session object, which can be directly configured when creating Sessions using the [Keys API](https://tyk.io/docs/api-reference/keys/create-custom-key) or [Policy API](https://tyk.io/docs/api-reference/policies/create-policy-definition), or from the key/policy management screens in the Dashboard UI:
```

A dedicated fix for **limited node license** deployments will be provided in an upcoming release. </Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

##### Security Fixes

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='CVE fixed'>
Addressed CVEs reported in dependent libraries, providing increased protection against security
vulnerabilities, including, but not limited to:

- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-33762" target="_blank">CVE-2026-33762</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-1229" target="_blank">CVE-2026-1229</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-33812" target="_blank">CVE-2026-33812</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-33532" target="_blank">CVE-2026-33532</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-2950" target="_blank">CVE-2026-2950</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2025-13465" target="_blank">CVE-2025-13465</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2025-15599" target="_blank">CVE-2025-15599</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-39882" target="_blank">CVE-2026-39882</a>
- <a href="https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34165" target="_blank">CVE-2026-34165</a>

> - <a href="https://cvereports.com/reports/GHSA-5c6j-r48x-rmvq" target="_blank">GHSA-5c6j-r48x-rmvq</a>

Reviewer 5: This can be omitted.
